README.md, before:

# Data Science Stack using MLFlow, DVC and ELK
## Overview
This guide helps you to set up a stack containing useful tools 
for data science projects.
It focuses on additional tools to support the process as much as
possible. This includes:
- MLFLow for the ML lifecycle, e.g. tracking metrics
- DVC for managing and versioning data
- ELK for managing logs and providing a UI for searching

To combine everything into an easily executable environment we will
use Docker to manage the different components.

## Prerequisite
To follow this guide you need some additional resources which might not be
available on your system. Please have a look at their documentation to get started.

- Docker <https://docs.docker.com/engine/>
- Docker Compose <https://docs.docker.com/compose/>

For development Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is used: <https://code.visualstudio.com/>

## Docker and Docker Compose

To run the environment inside docker just open a terminal, browse to the folder
containing the ```docker-compose.yml``` and run the following command: 
```docker-compose up -d``` 
(-d runs the containers in detach mode and is optional)

## ELK / EFK stack (Elasticsearch Logstash/Fluentd Kibana)
The Elastic Stack provides different products for log management and analysis.
It's only one possibility but has a broad adoption currently so we use it here
exemplary.
Product details can be found here: <https://www.elastic.co/>

The ```docker-compose.yml``` inside this repo includes everything to run the stack. 

A more detailed guide for setting up the ELK stack using docker can be found here <https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack-get-started/current/get-started-docker.html>.

After everything started successfully you can access Kibana using a web browser and the URL <http://localhost:5601>


If the environment can not be started, e.g. Kibana can not connect to elastic search - look inside the logs for the elasticsearch container.

You might find something like "max virtual memory areas vm.max_map_count [65530] is too low, increase to at least [262144]" if so check your OS documentation on how to change this.
(A solution can also be found here <https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/docker.html>)

## Python logging

An important aspect of longer running experiments is logging information. This will be helpful for understanding the program flow and finding errors.
Using ELK these information can be accessed easily and in a long term.

We configure Python logging and make the output accessible
for ELK.
Details on the Python config can be found here <https://docs.python.org/3/howto/logging.html#configuring-logging>

If you get a "KeyError: 'formatters'" your configuration can not be found by Python (it is searching in the current working directory (os.getcwd()) - check your path and try again.
## fluentd and ElasticSearch (EFK stack)

To send our logging output to ElasticSearch we use fluentd <https://docs.fluentd.org/>.
(Another possibility would be using FileBeat "belonging" to the ELK stack).

For installing fluentd follow the appropriate guide on <https://docs.fluentd.org/installation>.

### Configuration

The fluentd service will be running on the same machine as the Python code itself - although it would be possible do include this into a separate Docker container as well.

Open the file ```/etc/td-agent/td-agent.conf``` and replace the content, probably making a backup, with the following content (as seen in the ```td-agent.conf``` in this repo)
```
<source>
  @type forward
  port 24224
</source>

<match ds.**>
  @type elasticsearch
  host 127.0.0.1
  port 9200
  logstash_format true
  include_timestamp true # defaults to false
  with_transporter_log true
  flush_interval 30s
</match>
```
More detailed documentation can be found here.
- <https://docs.fluentd.org/output/elasticsearch>
- fluentd and Python <https://docs.fluentd.org/language-bindings/python>

Make sure your docker-compose is running and then restart the fluentd service.

For (re-)starting and status of the service use
```sudo systemctl status td-agent.service```.

You can check the output of the fluentd agent by inspecting the following file, e.g. using 
```tail -f /var/log/td-agent/td-agent.log```

If the start and connection to Elasticsearch (ES) is successful you should see something like
```
GET http://127.0.0.1:9200/ [status:200, request:0.002s, query:n/a]
```
Later you can also verify that the LOG messages from your Python code are send to ES by looking for lines like:
```
POST http://127.0.0.1:9200/_bulk [status:200, request:0.304s, query:0.298s]
```
These are triggered periodically depending on the configured flush_interval above.

### Using fluentd and Python logging

Here we show 2 different versions of the logging configuration.

A more manual approach that can be found inside the file ```logging/fluentd_test.py``` and the easier and probably more suitable way using **external** configuration (logging.yml) can be found in ```logging/fluentd_with_config.py```.

The third code inside ```logging/logging_test.py``` just configures standard Python logging without fluentd.

You can just run the Python scripts and check the fluentd log and the Kibana Web UI.

## MLFlow
MLFlow will be used as a server and a client the first part will focus on the server.
### MLFlow Tracking Server
This is the backend server the clients communicate with.
It will include a database (PostgreSQL in docker-compose) and an (local) artifact store 
for models and other artifacts.

Multiple clients could connect to the same MLFLow server for tracking experiments, e.g. a team
could work with the same server to share models or simplify tracking.

In addition to PostgreSQL the docker installs `adminer` a PHP UI to connect to the database.

You can open it using <http://localhost:8080> and connect to the database running inside the docker container using the server `mlflowdatabase:5432`, database `mlflow-postgres` and user/password from the `docker-compose.yml`.
### MLFLow UI

MLFlow provides a UI for browsing experiments and models
that can be accessed using your browser <http://localhost:5000>.
### MLFlow client - using MLFLow
The folder `mlflow` contains examples using MLFlow client APIs to connect and communicate with the MLFLow Tracking Server inside the Docker container. (Make sure you have installed inside your Python environment, e.g. using the requirements.txt in this repo)

For using a remote tracking server you have to configure:
- Set the remote tracking url - using the API or **environment variables if you run multi-step workflows!**
- Use a drive/storage that is accessible under the same name inside the remote server and the machine your running your experiment 
  - Normally this would be some kind of cloud storage (e.g. AWS S3) or a shared network folder
  - For the local docker example inside this repo a simple symbolic link will suffice
    - Find the location where Docker stores the data inside the Docker volume with 
      - ```docker volume ls```: list all volumes. Look for the one ending with `mlflow-data` and inspect it using
      - ``` docker volume inspect datascience-stack_mlflow-data```: The JSON output of this command contains the required key "Mountpoint". Copy its value and create a symbolic link
      - `sudo ln -s /var/lib/docker/volumes/datascience-stack_mlflow-data/_data/artifactStore/ /opt/mlflow/artifactStore`: Make sure to use the same folder name inside the docker and the host.
      In the Dockerfile we specified it as `/opt/mlflow/artifactStore`

After mounting the folder you can simply run `mlflow/simple.py` then open up the MLFlow UI and you should find a new experiment `my-simple-experiment` with some metrics. After clicking on a run you can find more details and you **should ensure** that the artifacts were saved correctly by scrolling down the page and click on `test.txt` under the Artifacts section.

### MLFlow basics and concepts
To get a better understanding of the underlying ideas and terminology of MLFLow and how to use it have a look at the following pages:
- <https://www.mlflow.org/docs/latest/quickstart.html>
- <https://www.mlflow.org/docs/latest/concepts.html>

## DVC - Data Version Control

> Data Version Control, or DVC, is a data and ML experiment management tool that takes advantage of the existing engineering toolset that you're already familiar with (Git, CI/CD, etc.). 
> -- <cite><https://dvc.org/doc></cite>

Although DVC is much more as a simple data versioning tool
this tutorial will use it for exactly that. Other aspects like tracking experiments, metrics and models will be done by MLFlow as described above.

This tutorial will take you through small parts taken from the official tutorials (<https://dvc.org/doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files/tutorial>).

- Make sure you have DVC installed
 (<https://dvc.org/doc/install>)
- Run `dvc init` (only required on new git repositories, already done in this tutorial)
  - This will add some new files/folders all containing .dvc* in their names 
  - These files contain metadata and will be used by DVC to keep track of the data we add in the next step
  - Add those files to git
- Get example data using ```dvc get https://github.com/iterative/dataset-registry tutorial/ver/data.zip```
  - This will download some example data (1800 cat/dog pics)
  - extract them into `data` folder and delete downloaded zip file
- Add the data folder using DVC instead of git `dvc add data`
  - Follow the instruction (of dvc add data) to add the dvc metadata to git using `git add data.dvc .gitignore`
    - This prevents git from tracking the raw data but only the "references" managed by DVC
- A small test script was added `dvc_python_test/train.py` to test the dataset (i.e. count the elements to indicate the change of size in the raw data)
- Add additional raw data using
  - `dvc get https://github.com/iterative/dataset-registry 
          tutorial/ver/new-labels.zip`
  - Running `dvc status` will show you that the `data` folder was modified.
    - Running `dvc_python_test/train.py` will now also output 2800 elements instead of 1800
  - Running `dvc add data` again will add the additional raw data and update the DVC internal metadata
    - Another `git status` will indicate that by showing that only `data.dvc` was modified

Commit message:

Added DVC remote config and tutorial on how to use DVC

README.md, after:

# Data Science Stack using MLFlow, DVC and ELK
## Overview
This guide helps you to set up a stack containing useful tools 
for data science projects.
It focuses on additional tools to support the process as much as
possible. This includes:
- MLFLow for the ML lifecycle, e.g. tracking metrics
- DVC for managing and versioning data
- ELK for managing logs and providing a UI for searching

To combine everything into an easily executable environment we will
use Docker to manage the different components.

## Prerequisite
To follow this guide you need some additional resources which might not be
available on your system. Please have a look at their documentation to get started.

- Docker <https://docs.docker.com/engine/>
- Docker Compose <https://docs.docker.com/compose/>

For development Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is used: <https://code.visualstudio.com/>

## Docker and Docker Compose

To run the environment inside docker just open a terminal, browse to the folder
containing the ```docker-compose.yml``` and run the following command: 
```docker-compose up -d``` 
(-d runs the containers in detach mode and is optional)

## ELK / EFK stack (Elasticsearch Logstash/Fluentd Kibana)
The Elastic Stack provides different products for log management and analysis.
It's only one possibility but has a broad adoption currently so we use it here
exemplary.
Product details can be found here: <https://www.elastic.co/>

The ```docker-compose.yml``` inside this repo includes everything to run the stack. 

A more detailed guide for setting up the ELK stack using docker can be found here <https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack-get-started/current/get-started-docker.html>.

After everything started successfully you can access Kibana using a web browser and the URL <http://localhost:5601>


If the environment can not be started, e.g. Kibana can not connect to elastic search - look inside the logs for the elasticsearch container.

You might find something like "max virtual memory areas vm.max_map_count [65530] is too low, increase to at least [262144]" if so check your OS documentation on how to change this.
(A solution can also be found here <https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/docker.html>)

## Python logging

An important aspect of longer running experiments is logging information. This will be helpful for understanding the program flow and finding errors.
Using ELK these information can be accessed easily and in a long term.

We configure Python logging and make the output accessible
for ELK.
Details on the Python config can be found here <https://docs.python.org/3/howto/logging.html#configuring-logging>

If you get a "KeyError: 'formatters'" your configuration can not be found by Python (it is searching in the current working directory (os.getcwd()) - check your path and try again.
## fluentd and ElasticSearch (EFK stack)

To send our logging output to ElasticSearch we use fluentd <https://docs.fluentd.org/>.
(Another possibility would be using FileBeat "belonging" to the ELK stack).

For installing fluentd follow the appropriate guide on <https://docs.fluentd.org/installation>.

### Configuration

The fluentd service will be running on the same machine as the Python code itself - although it would be possible do include this into a separate Docker container as well.

Open the file ```/etc/td-agent/td-agent.conf``` and replace the content, probably making a backup, with the following content (as seen in the ```td-agent.conf``` in this repo)
```
<source>
  @type forward
  port 24224
</source>

<match ds.**>
  @type elasticsearch
  host 127.0.0.1
  port 9200
  logstash_format true
  include_timestamp true # defaults to false
  with_transporter_log true
  flush_interval 30s
</match>
```
More detailed documentation can be found here.
- <https://docs.fluentd.org/output/elasticsearch>
- fluentd and Python <https://docs.fluentd.org/language-bindings/python>

Make sure your docker-compose is running and then restart the fluentd service.

For (re-)starting and status of the service use
```sudo systemctl status td-agent.service```.

You can check the output of the fluentd agent by inspecting the following file, e.g. using 
```tail -f /var/log/td-agent/td-agent.log```

If the start and connection to Elasticsearch (ES) is successful you should see something like
```
GET http://127.0.0.1:9200/ [status:200, request:0.002s, query:n/a]
```
Later you can also verify that the LOG messages from your Python code are send to ES by looking for lines like:
```
POST http://127.0.0.1:9200/_bulk [status:200, request:0.304s, query:0.298s]
```
These are triggered periodically depending on the configured flush_interval above.

### Using fluentd and Python logging

Here we show 2 different versions of the logging configuration.

A more manual approach that can be found inside the file ```logging/fluentd_test.py``` and the easier and probably more suitable way using **external** configuration (logging.yml) can be found in ```logging/fluentd_with_config.py```.

The third code inside ```logging/logging_test.py``` just configures standard Python logging without fluentd.

You can just run the Python scripts and check the fluentd log and the Kibana Web UI.

## MLFlow
MLFlow will be used as a server and a client the first part will focus on the server.
### MLFlow Tracking Server
This is the backend server the clients communicate with.
It will include a database (PostgreSQL in docker-compose) and an (local) artifact store 
for models and other artifacts.

Multiple clients could connect to the same MLFLow server for tracking experiments, e.g. a team
could work with the same server to share models or simplify tracking.

In addition to PostgreSQL the docker installs `adminer` a PHP UI to connect to the database.

You can open it using <http://localhost:8080> and connect to the database running inside the docker container using the server `mlflowdatabase:5432`, database `mlflow-postgres` and user/password from the `docker-compose.yml`.
### MLFLow UI

MLFlow provides a UI for browsing experiments and models
that can be accessed using your browser <http://localhost:5000>.
### MLFlow client - using MLFLow
The folder `mlflow` contains examples using MLFlow client APIs to connect and communicate with the MLFLow Tracking Server inside the Docker container. (Make sure you have installed inside your Python environment, e.g. using the requirements.txt in this repo)

For using a remote tracking server you have to configure:
- Set the remote tracking url - using the API or **environment variables if you run multi-step workflows!**
- Use a drive/storage that is accessible under the same name inside the remote server and the machine your running your experiment 
  - Normally this would be some kind of cloud storage (e.g. AWS S3) or a shared network folder
  - For the local docker example inside this repo a simple symbolic link will suffice
    - Find the location where Docker stores the data inside the Docker volume with 
      - ```docker volume ls```: list all volumes. Look for the one ending with `mlflow-data` and inspect it using
      - ``` docker volume inspect datascience-stack_mlflow-data```: The JSON output of this command contains the required key "Mountpoint". Copy its value and create a symbolic link
      - `sudo ln -s /var/lib/docker/volumes/datascience-stack_mlflow-data/_data/artifactStore/ /opt/mlflow/artifactStore`: Make sure to use the same folder name inside the docker and the host.
      In the Dockerfile we specified it as `/opt/mlflow/artifactStore`

After mounting the folder you can simply run `mlflow/simple.py` then open up the MLFlow UI and you should find a new experiment `my-simple-experiment` with some metrics. After clicking on a run you can find more details and you **should ensure** that the artifacts were saved correctly by scrolling down the page and click on `test.txt` under the Artifacts section.

### MLFlow basics and concepts
To get a better understanding of the underlying ideas and terminology of MLFLow and how to use it have a look at the following pages:
- <https://www.mlflow.org/docs/latest/quickstart.html>
- <https://www.mlflow.org/docs/latest/concepts.html>

## DVC - Data Version Control

> Data Version Control, or DVC, is a data and ML experiment management tool that takes advantage of the existing engineering toolset that you're already familiar with (Git, CI/CD, etc.). 
> -- <cite><https://dvc.org/doc></cite>

Although DVC is much more as a simple data versioning tool
this tutorial will use it for exactly that. Other aspects like tracking experiments, metrics and models will be done by MLFlow as described above.

This tutorial will take you through small parts taken from the official tutorials (<https://dvc.org/doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files/tutorial>).

- Make sure you have DVC installed
 (<https://dvc.org/doc/install>)
- Run `dvc init` (only required on new git repositories, already done in this tutorial)
  - This will add some new files/folders all containing .dvc* in their names 
  - These files contain metadata and will be used by DVC to keep track of the data we add in the next step
  - Add all those files to git
- Get example data using ```dvc get https://github.com/iterative/dataset-registry tutorial/ver/data.zip```
  - This will download some example data (1800 cat/dog pics)
  - Extract the download into `data` folder and delete downloaded zip file
- Add the data folder using DVC instead of git `dvc add data`
  - Follow the instruction (of dvc add data) to add the dvc metadata to git using `git add data.dvc .gitignore`
    - This prevents git from tracking the raw data but tracks only the "references" managed by DVC
- A small test script was added `dvc_python_test/train.py` to test the dataset (i.e. count the elements to indicate the change of size in the raw data)
- Add additional raw data using
  - `dvc get https://github.com/iterative/dataset-registry 
          tutorial/ver/new-labels.zip`
  - Running `dvc status` will show you that the `data` folder was modified.
    - Running `dvc_python_test/train.py` will now also output 2800 elements instead of 1800
  - Running `dvc add data` again will add the additional raw data and update the DVC internal metadata
    - Another `git status` will indicate that by showing that only `data.dvc` was modified
- Normally you would specify a remote storage where the data is located, e.g. AWS S3
  - In this example it was added by pointing to the sample data `dvc remote add -d iterative-reg https://github.com/iterative/dataset-registry`
- You can now try to get the most recent version of the data (or the version from the commit before) by deleting the contents of the data directory and running `dvc pull`
  - depending on the version (an actual git commit) you use you will end up with either 1800 or 2800 pictures (verify it by executing the python script)


For more details on DVC have a look at the great tutorials:
- <https://dvc.org/doc/start>
- <https://dvc.org/doc/start/data-versioning>
- <https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/what-is-dvc>
